# 1.1 Elements of Programming

Every programming language has 3 mechanisms for combining **SIMPLE** ideas to form more **COMPLEX** ones.

1. Primitive expressions
2. Means of combination
3. Means of abstraction

There are two kinds of elements: 
1. Data - stuff we manipulate
2. Procedures - descriptions of rules for manipulating DATA


## 1.1.1 Expressions

| Expression | Type |
| --- | --- |
| 486 | Primitive expression |
| +   | Primitive procedure  |
| (+ 1 2) | Compound expression |

(+ 1 2) is called a combination. We get its value by applying the procedure (operator) to arguments (value of operands).

Interpreter runs in a read-eval-print loop.

## 1.1.2 Naming and the Environment

Programming languages need to provide a way to use names to refer to a computational object.

```scheme
(define size 2) <-- SIMPLEST mean of abstraction
```

The environment is a piece of memory that tracks name-object pairs.

## 1.1.3 Evaluating Combinations

### GENERAL EVALUATION RULE

1. Evaluate the subexpressions of the combination.
2. Apply procedure to the arguments.

Rules for evaluating primitive expressions:

1. the values of numerals are the numbers that they name,
2. the values of built-in operators are the machine instruction sequences that carry out the corresponding operations, and
3. the values of other names are the objects associated with those names in the environment.

Exceptions to the general evaluation rule are called special forms, which have their own evaluation rules.

- Ex: define

## 1.1.4 Compound Procedures

Procedure definition is an abstraction technique by which a compound operation is given a name and can be referred to as a unit.

```scheme
(define ( square x ) ( * x x )) 

1. creates procedure 
2. gives it a name
```

General procedure definition form:
		
```scheme
(define (⟨name⟩ ⟨formal parameters⟩) ⟨body⟩)
```
		
Compound procedures are used in exactly the same way as primitive procedures.

## 1.1.5 The Substitution Model for Procedure Application

Evaluating a combination with a compound procedure is similar to one with a primitive procedure.

Here is the difference:
- Applying primitive procedures to arguments is built into interpreter.
- Applying compound procedures to arguments:
	- Evaluate body of procedure with each formal parameter replaced by corresponding argument.

The substitution model is a simplified and incomplete model of procedure application. Its purpose is to help beginners think about procedure application.

Typical interpreters do not evaluate procedure applications by manipulating the text of a procedure to substitute values for the formal parameters. In practice, the “substitution” is accomplished by using a local environment for the formal parameters.

Normal Order - fully expand then reduce:

- substitute operand expressions for parameters until expression with only primitive operators
- then perform evaluation

Applicative Order - evaluate then apply:

- evaluates operator and operands, then applies procedure to arguments

## 1.1.6 Conditional Expressions and Predicates

Case analysis is the construct of making tests and performing different operations based on the result of a test. A special form `cond` is used to indicate a case analysis.

The general form for `cond`:

```scheme
(cond (⟨p₁⟩ ⟨e₁⟩)
      (⟨p₂⟩ ⟨e₂⟩)
      …
      (⟨pₙ⟩ ⟨eₙ⟩))
```					

`<p>` = predicate, `<e>` =  consequent expression. A predicate is an expression whose value is either `#t` or `#f`. 

The value of `cond` is the value of the corresponding `<e>` to the first `<p>` that evaluates `#t`. If none of the `<p>'s` are `#t`, the value of the `cond` is **undefined**. 

A special form `if` is a conditional expression with only 2 cases.

The general form for `if`:

```scheme
(if ⟨predicate⟩ ⟨consequent⟩ ⟨alternative⟩)
```
	
Note: `and`, `or` are special forms. `not` is a regular procedure.

## 1.1.7 Example: Square Roots by Newton's Method

Procedures are like math functions but they must be **effective**.

| Math Function | Procedure |
| --- | --- |
| Declarative knowledge | Imperative knowledge |
| describe properties of things | describe how to do things |

**Square Root by Newton's Method - Math Function**

> $$ \sqrt{x} = y, y \geq 0, y^2 = x$$

**Square Root by Newton's Method - Procedure**

$$ \frac{y+\frac{x}{y}}{2} \textrm{, $y$ = guess} $$

```scheme
(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
  (if (good-enough? guess x)
      guess
      (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))

(define (improve guess x)
  (average guess (/ x guess)))

(define (average x y) 
  (/ (+ x y) 2))

(define (good-enough? guess x)
  (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))

(define (sqrt x)
  (sqrt-iter 1.0 x))
```

## 1.1.8 Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions

Note that the `sqrt` procedure is broken down into a bunch of other procedures. This is called **decomposition**. Each procedure accomplishes an *identifiable* task that can be used as a *module* in defining other procedures.

When we treat a procedure as a "black box", we are not concerned with *how* the procedure is implemented, but only with *what* it does. In other words, the procedure details are abstracted away, or so called a **procedural abstraction**.

A user should not need to know how the procedure is implemented in order to use it. 

The choice of names for the formal parameters of a procedure should not matter to the user of the procedure. A consequence of this is that the parameter names are *local* to the body of their procedure. Otherwise the choice of parameter names would influence the value of procedures used by the user.

A formal parameter of a procedure is called a *bound variable*. We say a procedure definition *binds* its formal parameter. A variable that is not bound is called *free*.

Procedures can have *internal definitions* that are local to the procedure. This is called **block structure**.

*Lexical scoping* is the discipline in which a free variable in a procedure gets its value from the enclosing procedure, which the free variable is bound to.



