# 1.2 Procedures and the Processes They Generate

We have learned the elements of programming, but we lack the
1. knowledge of which procedures are worth defining,
2. experience to predict the consequences of executing a procedure.

Analogous to chess: we have learned the rules of chess, but we lack the knowledge of which moves are worth making and the experience to predict the consequences of making a move.

To become experts in programming, we must learn to visualize the processes generated by various types of procedures. 

We control processes through procedures. A procedure is a pattern for the *local evolution* of a process, specifying how each stage of the process is built upon the previous stage.

We would like to be able to describe the *global* behavior of a process whose local evolution has been specified by a procedure, but this is very hard to do.

## 1.2.1 Linear Recursion and Iteration

The textbook gives two ways to compute the factorial function:
$$ n! = n * (n-1) * \dots * 2 * 1. $$

```scheme
; Generates a linear recursive process
; substitution model: expansion followed by contraction
; builds up a chain of deferred operations

(define (factorial n)
  (if (= n 1) 
      1 
      (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))
```

```scheme
; Generates a linear iterative process

(define (factorial n) 
  (fact-iter 1 1 n))

(define (fact-iter product counter max-count)
  (if (> counter max-count)
      product
      (fact-iter (* counter product)
                 (+ counter 1)
                 max-count)))
```

A *recursive process* is characterized by a chain of deferred operations. This chain of deferred operatons is kept track of by the interpreter. If the length of deferred operations grows linearly with $n$, then the process is called a *linear recursive process*.

An *iterative process* is characterized by its state being able to be tracked by a fixed number of state variables, together with a fixed rule that describes how the state variables should be updated as the process moves from state to state and an (optional) end test that specifies how the process should terminate.

Note: A recursive procedure is a procedure that refers to itself in its definition and has nothing to do with a recursive process.

A recursive procedure that generates an iterative process is called *tail-recursive*.
